---
author: admin
comments: true
date: 2011-08-26 04:38:03+00:00
layout: post
slug: goal-oriented-behavior-2009-0
title: Goal Oriented Behavior - July 2009
wordpress_id: 197
categories:
- Philosophy
tags:
- agent
- goab
---

_I stumbled across this while going through old emails. It was originally addressed to Austin Brown. I have not edited it since I found it, it is posted as is from July 2009._

Homo Sapiens is, to it's knowledge, only unique in it's ability to make value judgments on it's actions in the world. Many other animals show knowledge of their environment and an ability to carry out tasks of relative complexity (including rather complex computer algorithms like A* pathfinding), but the ability to evaluate how a goal was completed remains solely in the realm of Human comprehension.

<!-- more -->

This presents many questions, and many answers in generations paced have placed a special prominence on the human race. Throughout western history, humans have always been special, separate from animals, plants, and gods. The Christian influence is not alone in the middle ages in presenting our race as coming with special providence from on-high, with a transcendent imperative making them simply better than everything else (with even the distinctions of what makes a human rather loosely defined). It is interesting that the scientific revolution of the renaissance represents a desire of christians to understand God and His Creation, but that that path leads directly to one inevitable conclusion: humanity is at best a chance occurence in the cosmos, at worst, humanity is just one of billions of ordinary races throughout the universe to have achieved intelligence.

<!-- more -->

The questions presented are questions that have been asked and answered, directly or indirectly, through nearly every medium of expression in our recorded history well into prehistorical tales passed to us. What is the meaning of life? Why are we here? How did that happen? The sheer multitude of answers, much less the subtleties in nearly identical answers, raises a question of it's own: Is there an answer? It must be assumed that these are the right questions- if they're not, the problem is then with the capacity for human understanding and comprehension. Were that the problem, then the answer would most certainly be beyond comprehension, and not worth pursuing.

Since humans have lived successfully as a species for the past several million years, having an answer to this question is clearly not a prerequisite to intelligence in the theory of natural selection, so it must be that the pursuit of these answers is a journey to be undertaken in and of itself- an definitive answer will never come, but the milestones on the journey itself are well worth the time. Looking at the most influential people to live, the lists generally put similar names at the top: Jesus Christ, Siddhartha Guatama (The Buddha), the Prophet Mohammed, Isaac Newton, and Albert Einstein often make the cut. Religious leaders and scientists- no politicians.

These two categories each tell something specific. The first tell morals, the second tell facts. The two don't have to be mutually exclusive, but often are. The reasoning for this has already been lain- science has done tremendously well at showing there is no universal "good" and "evil"- from the standpoint of biology or sociology, the only good and evil are what helps an intelligent society function. That said, science in no way precludes the possibility of a moral structure. In order for a code of morals, or more broadly, for an ethical framework, there has to be some consideration of what makes a human.

The physiological answer is straightforward: eyes, ears, mouth, bilateral symmetry, arms, legs, lungs, heart, brain, etc. Add the clinical definition of brain-dead, and there's a person. The religious answer is much simpler: a person has a soul. Both these answers leave something to be desired, though. Julius Caesar and Jesus Christ are no longer people because they both died two millenia ago. Julius Caesar was not a person (by Dante's account) because he was not able to have a soul, or at least not a soul capable of accepting Jesus Christ as his lord and saviour. More importantly for today's technological society, neither is a decent definition for a primary key in a database.

The task of finding a unique definition that works for all aspects of academic pursuit in defining a human may be impossible. The United States Social Security system assigns a unique number to every person who receives Social Security benefits (that is, every US citizen and many foreigners who are able to claim benefits). This system, developed in the 1930s, is prone to many problems, the least of which being fraud. This is, then, not a good system- two (or many more) distinct human beings can be identified by the same number. There is a similar problem with passports, birth certificates, and even DNA sequences, fingerprints, and retinal scans. As fast as technology can find a new "unique" identifier, there is a technological way to circumvent that method of identification.

Identification of humans is, to be fair, only necessary in a society based on trust- which is every society. There is an implicit trust occurring every time two or more people engage in conversation- trust that the information conveyed is the information that is wanted, and that it is received as intended. Without this trust, communication would have no meaning as a medium for the exchange of ideas. This trust can of course be bent and broken in many ways, but it must be seen that as a whole, the concept of trust works. Solving the problem of identification is not the goal, but it is important as a springboard for many other questions, including one posed already: what makes a human?

In the Descartian view of mind-body duality, expressed in every mainstream religion, the soul and thoughts of a human are distinctly separate from the body of the person. If this is the case, then only our thoughts are important. If this is not that case, then the human simply ends at the skin. However, both views are simplistic, though the second seems to have more sway in modern (especially legal) thought. If the first answer is correct, then what is a thought, or the soul? There is no physiological evidence of a "soul" as separate from a body, so for the scientific mind the separation of thought must be the deciding factor. Neuroscience has a rough sketch of what makes a thought- electrochemical impulses focused in the cortex but effecting the rest of the body.

If thoughts are as simple as this biological view presents, then it should be possible, in theory, to re-create the physiological functioning of the nervous system in a working model different from the model provided by a creature's DNA. Where, then, does the "person" end, or begin? Many sci-fi authors have tackled this problem, to varying degrees. Most hold the view that sentience can indeed be emulated, though in every case there is a tremendous conflict between these "artificial" life forms and their "organic" or "natural" creators.

The question also works in the opposite direction, and is rather more pressing in the context of replacing parts of the human body with "artificial" or "mechanical" replacements. The case of amputees with specially designed running limbs allows these people, who have the full rights of any other human being, the ability to run much faster and easier
then their completely "natural" counterparts. These devices are of course not allowed in today's competitive events, but if they were, many world records would be shattered. Were they allowed, there would also be a population of athletes who deliberately amputate limbs in order to use these devices.

If that sounds preposterous, it is already happening. The issue of steroids and doping is a tremendous issue in many sports, most visibly the Olympics, the Tour de France, and US Major League Baseball. The subculture of body mutilation for artistic purposes is also an example of the field emerging as "transhumanism" - in that case, using the body as a canvas for expression of creativity. The entire field raises the fundamental question of what it means to be human, a much larger and more complex question that simply answering "Homo sapien". The issue grows larger when considering what technology will enable.

Already the Internet, and Wikipedia especially, has begun to shift the focus from "Just In case" knowledge to "just in time" knowledge. As computing technology gives people the ability to work faster, so to does every other technology increase the rate of growth of the body of human knowledge. This body of knowledge may be what makes humanity as a whole a special race, and worth doing everything possible to preserve it's continued existence.

The most interesting issue for transhumanism, however, lies in its intrinsic connection with technology and the pace of technological innovations. Assuming the concept behind Moore's Law and the "Law of Accelerating Returns" is correct, then the continued increase in the pace of technological development, as well as information processing capabilities, presents a future that, without preemptive consideration and considerable foresight, will be left to a moral, ethical, and philosophical view of human's existence that is only capable of being reactionary to the course of history (if it is not already).

Such a philosophical view of the world will have to attempt to answer the fundamental question of what it means to be human. The answer must be specific enough to be flexible long after the evolution of "artificial intelligence", any transhuman activities, and be applicable for potential contact with, if not applicable directly for, any extra-terrestrial contact. At the same time, it must be specific enough to provided a basis on which to build both an ethical code and a legal code of living. In short, the best theory will work for any intelligence.

This is probably impossible. It is, if not the holy grail of philosophical work, at very least a far enough goal to be pursuable from today's view. Of course, the reply is nothing is impossible, so it's pursuit alone will be beneficial to future endeavours.

The first task is, as stated, to define what it means to be "human", or more generally, "intelligent". There is no accepted or complete definition, but a good starting point is goal-oriented and capable of learning. This is a good starting point because it covers a wide variety of examples, and each example is well-ordered against other examples. That is, it is capable to measure capabilities to carry out goals of various complexities, as well as measure learning ability. The "well" part of "well-ordered" will be left to future psychologists with better tools. To the philosopher, however, the purpose isn't to grant the ability to define one specimen as better than another, but rather to start to recognize what others are capable of.

With the ordering of the intelligence of creatures comes both a hierarchy inherent in the biosphere, as well as a responsibility for higher animals, especially those with human-level faculty, to recognize the effects of their actions on their surroundings. It is in the capability of sentient beings to direct their actions to be, at very least, not detrimental to the environment around them. This is nearly a common sense survival argument- it is not easy, or all that possible, to survive in a post-apocolyptic world. Therefore, sentient creatures should ensure they take the best care of their environment as possible.

With preservation as a fundamental tenant for good living, the second goal is democracy, in the liberal sense that all beings are ensured a good quality of life. The criterion for quality of life, however, is much harder to measure. Many views today have similar tenants health, freedom, happiness. The first is directly measurable. The second is harder to measure empirically, but organizations such as Reporters without Borders have made great strides in providing such tools. The final question can only be answered by one person- the person the knowledge is needed from. There is no external measure for a person's happiness. It seems, then, to be very difficult to approach from a scientific view.

The difficulty lies not in the mechanics of thought, but the myriad of subtle varieties within thought, each leading to different conclusions about the "known" world. Every sentient being is working toward some goal. Most critters have simple goals, and probably don't realize they're working at a task- bees are just doing what bees do. More creative creatures, like humans, have much more complex goals, and often many goals, generally working at cross purposes both against themselves and especially against others. Even complex goals with many sub-goals will often have conflicts and cross-purposes before its completion.

The encounters of goals working at cross purposes (which is every encounter, even when the purpose is generally the same) is a conflict. Every time two or more sentient being interact, the resolution of that conflict has a tremendous influence on how each being will act in the future. What is truly amazing is that there is so little violence in conflict resolution. The general dislike of violence as a tool for conflict resolution is evidence better than any other for the evolution of complex societal structures in any social creature (that is, every creature). Looking at human history, it seems these social rules fall into one fundamental rule: don't hurt people, but if you have to, it's better to hurt people outside the tribe.

The desire to completely rid society of violence is probably another impossible task. In fact, it is probably very difficult to arbitrarily impose any specific sort of rule on a group of people, or even one person. It seems that rules must be accepted by each and every individual person of their own accord- even such extreme measures as those employed by Big Brother in Orwell's 1984 would not be perfect. People are finicky creatures, and the ability for abstract thought seems to have given humans the need for the freedom to exercise that thought. That freedom can only be given up willingly, and can be reclaimed at any time.

With the ability to decide whether an action is good or bad comes the imperative to use those faculties.
