---
author: admin
comments: true
date: 2012-07-23 18:00:06+00:00
layout: post
slug: chili
title: Chili
wordpress_id: 459
categories:
- Lazy-Ass Gourmet
tags:
- beer
- chili
- ground beef
- salsa
---

Cold day or hot, nothing quite says tasty like a bowl of home-made chili. Probably the easiest dish to take and make your own, so many easy things go into the flavors of a pot of easy chili, you can't help but not experiment with this recipe!

<!-- more -->

  * 1/2 lbs ground beef
  * 1 12oz can salsa (your choice, determines spicy level)
  * 1 8oz can refried beans
  * 1 12oz bottle beer (your choice, determines secondary flavors)
  * Olive Oil


This recipe goes easy by trusting the brewer and salsa-er (one who makes salsa?) for the flavors in the chili. With that in mind, choose your favorite salsa and a beer you think would go with that salsa, and start your burners!





Brown the beef. Put a bit of oil in the pan, let it get nice and hot, add the beef, stir until well cooked. Seriously, don't fuck around with ground beef, cook it all the way through.





Add salsa the refried beans. Stir, let beans melt.





Add beer, more beer for thinner, less for thicker. Let simmer, while drinking second beer. Stir occasionally. Simmer at least 10 minutes, longer for more flavor but less stock.





Wipe off counter, serve with beer! You'll be delighted how well the





### Alternatives:

  1. Cube cheddar and mozzarella cheese, and replace for beer. Stir _constantly_, but only until heated. Serve with chips (and beer). Cubing the cheeses into 1/4 inch chunks is important, otherwise they melt weird and you get a really odd texture. Don't use shredded cheese.

  2. Different salsas, different beers. For the true chef, cook your own salsa and brew your own beer. Brewing is not Lazy-Ass Gourmet, and I don't brew myself, but it is a noble hobby.




