---
layout: post
title: Something From Nothing
date: 2014-02-09 14:11:07 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
---

# Something from Nothing
### Techniques for small-group product development

## Overview

Class time should be spend 10 minutes administrative, 40 minutes in groups of 3,
and 20 minutes in full-group discussion. Projects should be managed
consistently.

## Introduction

Product development is a subset of project management dealing with the smaller,
but harder, problem of converting an idea into a working, effective solution to
a problem. Each product development cycle has, nearly by definition, never been
done before and certainly none of the members of the team have approached each
specific idea. That said, the effective and judicious use of project management
techniques can and will provide a framework for repeated success at developing
new products.

Let's start with some definitions. A product is anything an organization
provides to solve a problem. A sweatshirt is a product that solves the problem
of needing warm clothes in cold weather. A soup kitchen is a product (more
specifically a service) that solves the problem of feeding some impovershed
members of the community. The idea of solving a problem is critical to creating
a new product. Quite simply, if there is no need, there will be no demand, and
if there is no demand, there is no customer. If there is no customer, the
product development was a complete waste of resources.

Keep this idea in mind through the entire cycle: What is the problem? How does
this product solve the problem? With that in mind, the hard parts work
themselves out.

## Task Forces

Now that we know what we're doing (solving a problem), we can start working
together. First we should deal with communication. Writing is a necessity.
Meetings are important. Small groups (which I will be calling task forces) are
critical. Meetings with more than a dozen people get very difficult. Break the
organization down so no more than a dozen people are in any organizational unit.
(Of course, some people will be in multiple OUs- managers will be in the OU of
their group, and the OU of the group of managers.) Within the dozen-person OU,
meetings of the full group should happen infrequently (maybe an hour per week).
Instead, the OU should work in task forces of three members. Task-forces can be
long-term commitments, e.g. the accounting task force, the IT task force, or the
photography task force. However, the majority of task forces should be short-
term, meeting once or twice over the course of a week to brainstorm an idea,
troubleshoot an issue, or implement a specific part of a product. People will be
members of multiple task forces at any one time.

With this breakdown, it becomes very easy to consider ideas quickly and
efficiently. Each idea is given to or generated by a task force, worked on and
transformed into something else (either a more workable and usable idea, or
discarded to the "considered" bin), and presented back to the group as a whole.
So far, this has been fairly theoretical, so let's turn to a specific example.

SIFE meets twice a week for an hour and 15 minutes. In order to meet a deadlin
for ordering new product, the group needs to decide what and how much inventory
is needed for the upcoming football game. In a naive classroom setting, the
group sits in a large hodge-podge, shouting and discussing ideas at whim, and
the entire process takes the full 75 minutes.

Alternatively, the class can split into task forces. The class meets as a whole
for 10 minutes for administrative issues, and to give the assignment: in task
forces, decided which products your task force feels necessary. The class then
breaks into groups of three, and each task force is given one or two product
categories to order for- t-shirts, sweats, other, perhaps. The task forces then
meet for 20 minutes. While they are recommended to focus on a specific category,
this is an entirely freeform process, and any ideas presented in the task forces
are important. After 20 minutes, the task forces come back together as a full
group, each with their product recommendations. Each task force nominates one
spokesperson to present their recommendation to the group. When the task forces
have contributed their recommendations, there can be a 10 minute period of
general discussion.

General discussion is not a cacaphony. When in any meeting, discussion passes to
the left. The facilitator starts somewhere, asks for input, and moves to the
next person on the left. After 10 minutes of round robin, or when there are no
new comments, the issue is considered closed, and the recommendation for
ordering is passed to the inventory task force, who will order and inventory the
product.

This general framework can and will work well for nearly any discussion time. 10
minutes administrative and prep, 20 to 40 minutes in task forces, 10 to 20
minutes in general discussion. It is very important that, in the task forces, no
idea be considered off-topic. Yes, try to keep in mind the general idea you're
considering, but don't ever ignore an idea because it isn't directly related-
often, those are the most "outside the box" ideas. Also, groups should have a
large sheet of butcher paper and a couple markers to write things (anything?
everything? you choose) down.

## Projects

A project, in the


