---
layout: post
title: Science
date: 2014-02-09 14:09:46 -0500
categories:
- Science
- Philosophy
---

Science today has three meanings. First, science is used to refer to technology.
This is not science, so much as the application of science. Technology is what
the general public sees as both the legacy and promise of science, but often
without the necessary context to appreciate the complete lack of moral direction
in technology. The second meaning of science is the body of knowledge of
science. This is a body of knowledge that is built on the back of empirical
observation, and is the best account available of the physical universe humans
inhabit. Finally, science is the personal journey of appreciating and making
contributions to this body of knowledge. This journey can be deeply fulfilling
to its practitioners, but is very difficult to pursue correctly. Each of these
aspects of science has profound implications for both philosophy and the general
populace as a whole, but it seems that the general public especially have an
unhealthy view of the purpose and meaning of science.

The technological aspect of science is most recognized in the public's mind.
From the beautiful images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope to the terrible
horrors of the atomic bomb, from the miracles of medicine to the nightmares of
biological weaponry, the public image both praises and maligns technology. This
is entirely inappropriate.  Technology has no inherent moral value, good or bad.
Technology does not in itself change a way of living, nor does it cognizantly
effect a relation to being. Technology simply is. Judgements on technology's use
can only be made in relation to the way the person uses it, and the effect they
intend to create with its use. Examining technology outside of the context of
its use is unhealthy, in that it creates unrealistic expectations on the results
of its use, and it allows users to detach themselves from their personal
responsibility in using technology.

Science as a body of human knowledge is even more a-moral than the technology of
science. While technology's use can be judged morally, the body of observable
science is exactly and equally valid no matter the observer. Science as a body
of knowledge is the collection of all things that are factually observable, and
can be tested by precise observation. Perhaps the best place to examine this
today is the evolution/creationism debate. Evolution is not a question of
belief. Naturalists observe, repeatedly and in every setting possible, that
animals will adapt to their environment over successive generations. Animals
will pass traits to their offspring. This is observable fact. There is no
controversy in today's media over gravity, and yet the belief that heavier
objects fall faster permeates throughout even the highest levels of education.
It is an observable fact, a fundamental part of the physical universe, that
objects of different masses will accelerate at the same rate. It is just as
observable and fundamental that species change over the course of generations.

This is the aspect of science that is most under duress today. This is also the
aspect of science that is least "human"- the entire course of science as a body
of knowledge has shown continually and unequivically that humanity is nothing
special in the universe- the facts that science holds are manifestations of the
physical universe, and that physical universe is the ultimate and sole arbiter
of what is and is not true. It has no moral judgement, and the only truth that
is true is what can be observed of that physical universe.

While science as the body of knowledge about reality is universal in nature,
science as a pursuit is very much the opposite. Science as a pursuit is the
personal, the intimate relationship between a scientist and Nature. This is the
relationship a scientist has when exploring Nature around, and observing the
physical reality she inhabits. Whether it is repeating the observations of those
before her, or truly observing something unique that no one has seen before,
this intimacy science provides with Nature is the beauty and moral quality of
the technique, the body of knowledge, and the fruits of that knowledge. This is
the aspect of science that is hard to convey, but this is the poetic aspect of
science that can be truly fantastic and wonderful. This is also the hardest
aspect of science to appreciate and to practice.

To do science correctly requires a great deal of humility, doubt, and
uncertainty. Every time a scientist does an experiment that corroborates the
theory, the good scientist does not react with "Eureka, I've got it!" but rather
with "Well, did I accidentally get rust on the spoon?" This humility is
important in every intellectual discipline. This personal humility on the part
of the scientist reflects itself in the body of knowledge of science as
uncertainty. A scientific theory is never proven "true" or "false", but rather,
"mostly certain the theory is correct" and "mostly certain the theory is
incorrect".

An example is in order. On a beach in Hawaii, there is a couple vacationing who
claim to share dreams- that is, they can communicate with one another while both
unconcious. A scientist meets these tourists, and in passing they mention their
ability. This fascinates the scientist. By everything she knows of the natural
world, this is nearly certainly impossible- a billion to one odds against. She
tells them so, but they are adamant- they can experience the same dreams, and
communicate while dreaming. "This is a scientific claim," says the scientist,
"because we can test it." The couple agrees, and the three go off to devise a
series of experiments to test the claim of shared dreaming. They start by having
the couple dream together, and then discuss their experiences after the fact. As
one starts to say something, the other immediately agrees. Well, sure, they
could both have had the same dream, but the scientist is so certain against this
she decides that a more plausible reason for their consistent stories would be
collusion after the fact.

Of course, there is still the possibility that this couple is indeed sharing
dreams. The next experiment has the couple sharing dreams, but instead of
discussing their dreams together, they meet one-on-one with an interviewer. Of
course, this has other potential pitfalls, so the scientist also does an
experiment where the couple writes their dreams, and she compares what the
couple wrote. Let's say that now, after several trials, all three of these
experiments continue to show that this couple is indeed able to communicate
through their dreams. The scientist is very excited- by everything she knows,
this shouldn't be possible. So she does more experiments- does it matter whether
the couple is in the same room when they dream? Does this ability decrease with
distance between the two? Or is it affected by the materials between them- say
with the couple separated by glass instead or concrete or steel.

This approach to exploring the world predicates on a single axiom: there is a
natural world that is consistent and can be observed.
